NEXT documentation (#1273)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/queries/composed-queries/sequential-queries.adoc

       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-04-11')}]->(laptop),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-12-11')}]->(coffee),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-06-02')}]->(headphones),
       (leila)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-05-17')}]->(laptop),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-02-27')}]->(phone),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-08-23')}]->(headphones),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(coffee),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(chocolate),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-01-02')}]->(laptop),
        
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(laptop),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(phone),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(headphones),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(chocolate),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(coffee)
----

== Composing queries with `NEXT`

.`NEXT` syntax
[source, cypher]
----
<Query1>

NEXT

<Query2>

NEXT

<Query3>
----

== Passing values to subsequent queries

In the following example, `NEXT` passes the variable `customer` to the second query:

.Passing a variable to another query via `NEXT`
====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

> RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer

Reviewer: I know this is a basic example, but could we have more in the second query than just RETURN? i.e. another match referencing customer variable

Author: would it work like this?

```
MATCH (c:Customer)
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

MATCH (customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer
```

Reviewer: Yep, that would be better imo

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| chocolateCustomer

| "Amir"
| "Mateo"
| "Yusuf"

1+d|Rows: 3
|===
====

.Passing multiple variables to another query via `NEXT`
====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer, p AS product
             
NEXT
             
RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer,
       product.price * (1 - customer.discount) AS chocolatePrice

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| chocolateCustomer | chocolatePrice

| "Amir" | 4.5
| "Mateo" | 4.75
| "Yusuf" | 4.5

2+d|Rows: 3
|===
====

[NOTE]
====
When followed by a `NEXT` clause, expressions in a `RETURN` clause must either be variables that have been introduced before or they must be aliased with `AS`.
====

== Interactions with `CALL` subqueries

> You can use `NEXT` to rewrite queries containing  `CALL` subqueries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`NEXT` can serve as a more readable alternative to `CALL` subqueries.
```

[[call-subquery-rewrite]]
.Rewriting a query with a `CALL` subquery
====

> [cols="1,1"]

Reviewer: Maybe we could tabulate these examples?
I think it would be cleaner than tables

Author: added the tabs

|===
a|
.`CALL` subquery
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
CALL (p) {
    MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p)
    RETURN collect(c.firstName) AS customers
}
RETURN p.name as product, customers
----
a|
.`NEXT`
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p

NEXT

MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p)
RETURN collect(c.firstName) AS customers, p

NEXT

RETURN p.name as product, customers
----
|===

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| product      | customers

| "Laptop"     | ["Amir", "Mateo", "Leila", "Yusuf"]
| "Phone"      | ["Niko"]
| "Headphones" | ["Keisha", "Hannah", "Niko"]
| "Chocolate"  | ["Amir", "Mateo", "Yusuf"]
| "Coffee"     | ["Mateo", "Hannah", "Niko"]
2+d|Rows: 5
|===
====

> Even though the `NEXT` query in <<call-subquery-rewrite>> has more lines, it is divided into three segments which are easy to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the query which uses `NEXT` has more lines, it is divided into three segments which are easy to read.
```

It also avoids the parentheses and indentation of the `CALL` subquery.

> Variables which are local to a query and which are not explicitly returned are not accessible by subsequent queries in the context of `NEXT`. This allows you to control variable scope similarly to what you can do with `WITH`, see xref:clauses/with.adoc#variable-scope[Control variables in scope].

Reviewer: Should this be here?

Author: moved

====

== Interactions with conditional queries

[[next-and-conditional]]
. Conditional queries in `NEXT`
====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product)<-[:SUPPLIES]-(s:Supplier)
RETURN c.firstName AS customer, s.name AS supplier

NEXT

WHEN supplier = "TechCorp" THEN
  RETURN customer, "Tech enjoyer" AS personality
WHEN supplier = "Foodies Inc." THEN
  RETURN customer, "Tropical plant enjoyer" AS personality
  
NEXT

RETURN customer, collect(DISTINCT personality) AS personalities

NEXT

WHEN size(personalities) > 1 THEN
  RETURN customer, "Enjoyer of tech and plants" AS personality
ELSE
  RETURN customer, personalities[0] AS personality
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| customer | personality

| "Amir"   | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Mateo"  | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Yusuf"  | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Niko"   | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Hannah" | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Leila"  | "Tech enjoyer"
| "Keisha" | "Tech enjoyer"

2+d|Rows: 7
|===
====

> In <<next-and-conditional>>, customers are assigned personality types based on the products they purchased.

Reviewer: this does not render - also, I am not sure about linking to examples just above. Couldn't we just say "In the example above.."?
```suggestion
In the query above, customers are assigned personality types based on the products they purchased.
```

The second query is a conditional query that returns different base personality types for different suppliers the customers purchased from.
The third query aggregates the personality types.
Finally, the fourth query is another conditional query which subsumes multiple base personality types, if present, to a new personality.

== Interactions with `UNION` queries

[[next-and-union]]
.`NEXT` in a query using `UNION`
====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product{name: "Laptop"})
RETURN c.firstName AS customer
UNION ALL
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]-> (:Product{name: "Coffee"})
RETURN c.firstName AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer AS customer, count(customer) as numberOfProducts
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| customer | numberOfProducts

| "Amir"   | 1
| "Mateo"  | 2
| "Leila"  | 1
| "Yusuf"  | 1
| "Hannah" | 1
| "Niko"   | 1

2+d|Rows: 6
|===
====

> In <<next-and-union>>, the list of customer names from the first query has a duplicate entry for "Mateo" who bought both a laptop and coffee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the list of customer names from the first query has a duplicate entry for "Mateo" who bought both a laptop and coffee.
```

The use of `UNION ALL` added him to the list twice.
The second query can access the list, because both parts of the `UNION` return a part of the list, aliased as `customer`.

> By using `count()`, the list aggregates the duplicate in the `RETURN` part of the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[`count()`], the list aggregates the duplicate in the `RETURN` part of the query.
```

= Sequential queries (`NEXT`)
:description: Information about how to use `NEXT` to construct sequential queries in Cypher.
:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-2025.06

> `NEXT` allows for linear composition of queries into a sequence of smaller, self-contained segments while making return values from one segment available in the next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`NEXT` allows for linear composition of queries into a sequence of smaller, self-contained segments, passing the return values from one segment to the next.
```

`NEXT` has the following benefits:

* `NEXT` can improve the modularity and readability of complex queries.
* `NEXT` can be used instead of xref:subqueries/call-subquery.adoc[] and the xref:clauses/with.adoc[] clause to construct complex queries.

> * `NEXT` can improve the usability of xref:queries/composed-queries/conditional-queries.adoc[conditional] and xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[UNION] queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `NEXT` can improve the usability of xref:queries/composed-queries/conditional-queries.adoc[conditional `WHEN`] and xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[combined `UNION`] queries.
```

       (amir)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-10-09')}]->(laptop),
       (amir)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-01-10')}]->(chocolate),
       (keisha)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-07-09')}]->(headphones),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-03-05')}]->(chocolate),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-03-05')}]->(coffee),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-04-11')}]->(laptop),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-12-11')}]->(coffee),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-06-02')}]->(headphones),
       (leila)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-05-17')}]->(laptop),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-02-27')}]->(phone),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-08-23')}]->(headphones),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(coffee),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(chocolate),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-01-02')}]->(laptop),
        
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(laptop),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(phone),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(headphones),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(chocolate),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(coffee)
----

> == Composing queries with `NEXT`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Syntax
```

.`NEXT` syntax
[source, cypher]
----
<Query1>

NEXT

<Query2>

NEXT

<Query3>
----

== Passing values to subsequent queries

In the following example, `NEXT` passes the variable `customer` to the second query:

> .Passing a variable to another query via `NEXT`

Reviewer: If the example block is just 1 query, I think we can leave it.

i.e. I would remove the example block, and make "Passing a variable to another query via `NEXT`" as the query header (I generally try to avoid the "Query" header, though I know it is still very prevalent in the manual)

Author: changed the simple examples

====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| chocolateCustomer

| "Amir"
| "Mateo"
| "Yusuf"

1+d|Rows: 3
|===
====

.Passing multiple variables to another query via `NEXT`
====
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer, p AS product
             
NEXT
             
RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer,
       product.price * (1 - customer.discount) AS chocolatePrice

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| chocolateCustomer | chocolatePrice

| "Amir" | 4.5
| "Mateo" | 4.75
| "Yusuf" | 4.5

2+d|Rows: 3
|===
====

[NOTE]
====

> When followed by a `NEXT` clause, expressions in a `RETURN` clause must either be variables that have been introduced before or they must be aliased with `AS`.

Reviewer: This needs to be clarified, I think. Does it only pertain to RETURN? How is it different from "normal" returns?

Author: hm... good question. it was my attempt to account for the negative examples, like this one:

```
RETURN 1

NEXT

RETURN 1 AS a
```

Reviewer: How about:

"When followed by `NEXT`, a `RETURN` clause may only contain variables or aliased expressions.
Literals or unaliased expressions are not allowed.
For example, `RETURN 1` and `RETURN 1 + 1` cannot precede `NEXT`, but `RETURN 1 AS one` and `RETURN 1 + 1 AS two` can."

====

> == Interactions with `CALL` subqueries and `WITH`
> 
> You can use `NEXT` to rewrite queries containing  `CALL` subqueries or a `WITH` clause.

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to what makes most sense to present. The above simple examples show in my mind the same thing as what we want to show with the `WITH` part in this section. I think it could be better to remove `WITH` from this section. If we want a with case we need an example where the readability greatly improves by using `NEXT`. That's my thoughts at least. 
```suggestion
== Interactions with `CALL` subqueries

You can use `NEXT` to rewrite queries containing  `CALL` subqueries.
```

[[call-subquery-rewrite]]
.Rewriting a query with a `CALL` subquery
====
[cols="1,1"]
|===
a|
.`CALL` subquery
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
CALL (p) {
    MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p)
    RETURN collect(c.firstName) AS customers
}
RETURN p.name as product, customers
----
a|
.`NEXT`
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p

NEXT

MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p)
RETURN collect(c.firstName) AS customers, p

NEXT

RETURN p.name as product, customers
----
|===

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| product      | customers

| "Laptop"     | ["Amir", "Mateo", "Leila", "Yusuf"]
| "Phone"      | ["Niko"]
| "Headphones" | ["Keisha", "Hannah", "Niko"]
| "Chocolate"  | ["Amir", "Mateo", "Yusuf"]
| "Coffee"     | ["Mateo", "Hannah", "Niko"]
2+d|Rows: 5
|===
====

Even though the `NEXT` query in <<call-subquery-rewrite>> has more lines, it is divided into three segments which are easy to read.
It also avoids the parentheses and indentation of the `CALL` subquery.

> [[with-rewrite]]
> .Rewriting a `WITH` query
> ====
> [cols="1,1"]
> |===
> a|
> .`WITH`
> [source, cypher]
> ----
> LET a = 1
> WITH a
> LET b = a + 1
> WITH a, b
> LET c = a + b + 1
> WITH b, c
> LET d = b + c
> RETURN d
> ----
> a|
> .`NEXT`
> [source, cypher]
> ----
> LET a = 1
> RETURN a
> 
> NEXT 
> 
> LET b = a + 1
> RETURN a, b
> 
> NEXT 
> 
> LET c = a + b + 1
> RETURN b, c
> 
> NEXT
> 
> LET d = b + c
> RETURN d
> ----
> |===
> ====
> 
> 
> Variables which are local to a query and which are not explicitly returned are not accessible by subsequent queries in the context of `NEXT`.
> This allows you to control variable scope similarly to what you can do with `WITH`, see xref:clauses/with.adoc#variable-scope[Control variables in scope]: in <<with-rewrite>>, each occurrence of `WITH` is replaced by a `RETURN` and a `NEXT`, preserving the variable scope.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Variables which are local to a query and which are not explicitly returned are not accessible by subsequent queries in the context of `NEXT`. This allows you to control variable scope similarly to what you can do with `WITH`, see xref:clauses/with.adoc#variable-scope[Control variables in scope].
```

Reviewer 2: See above reasoning.

[NOTE]
====
`NEXT` cannot be used inside a `CALL` subquery that uses the (deprecated) xref:subqueries/call-subquery.adoc#importing-with[importing `WITH`] syntax.
====

> == Interactions with conditional queries

Reviewer 2: Really like this example!

[[next-and-conditional]]

> .`NEXT` in a conditional query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Conditional queries in `NEXT`
```

  RETURN customer, "Tropical plant enjoyer" AS personality
  
NEXT

RETURN customer, collect(DISTINCT personality) AS personalities

NEXT

WHEN size(personalities) > 1 THEN
  RETURN customer, "Enjoyer of tech and plants" AS personality
ELSE
  RETURN customer, personalities[0] AS personality
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| customer | personality

| "Amir"   | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Mateo"  | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Yusuf"  | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Niko"   | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Hannah" | "Enjoyer of tech and plants"
| "Leila"  | "Tech enjoyer"
| "Keisha" | "Tech enjoyer"

2+d|Rows: 7
|===
====

In <<next-and-conditional>>, customers are assigned personality types based on the products they purchased.
The second query is a conditional query that returns different base personality types for different suppliers the customers purchased from.
The third query aggregates the personality types.
Finally, the fourth query is another conditional query which subsumes multiple base personality types, if present, to a new personality.

== Interactions with `UNION` queries

[[next-and-union]]

> .`NEXT` in a query using `UNION`

Reviewer 2: I think this example is fine and easy to reason about, maybe not the most exciting creation ever but it does the job.
